{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1038\cocoasubrtf290
{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Verdana;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;\red255\green255\blue255;}
{\*\listtable{\list\listtemplateid1\listhybrid{\listlevel\levelnfc23\levelnfcn23\leveljc0\leveljcn0\levelfollow0\levelstartat1\levelspace360\levelindent0{\*\levelmarker \{disc\}}{\leveltext\leveltemplateid1\'01\uc0\u8226 ;}{\levelnumbers;}\fi-360\li720\lin720 }{\listname ;}\listid1}}
{\*\listoverridetable{\listoverride\listid1\listoverridecount0\ls1}}
\paperw11900\paperh16840\margl1440\margr1440\vieww9000\viewh8400\viewkind0
\deftab720
\pard\pardeftab720\ql\qnatural

\f0\fs26 \cf0 \cb2 This is a log of what i have done and when I did it. The main puropose is as reference material for compiling a paper at the and of my summer internship. However all are welcome to have a look at how im getting on.\'a0\
\
\
\pard\pardeftab720\ql\qnatural

\b \cf0 Friday 4 June
\b0 \

\b \
\pard\pardeftab720\ql\qnatural

\b0 \cf0 installed and played with beetlz/bonc packages- still getting errors with OpenJDK & OpenJDMLI\
research into JML annotations - Read a number of papers on the functionality of JML and partially completed the JML values in my table for concurrency\'a0\
\
\
\pard\pardeftab720\ql\qnatural

\b \cf0 Tuesday 8 June
\b0 \
\
Briefly tried again to get my eclipse import of the project working.\
\pard\tx220\tx720\pardeftab720\li720\fi-720\ql\qnatural
\ls1\ilvl0\cf0 {\listtext	\'95	}I have established that in one case it is \'a0a problem \'a0with multiple imports of the Variable class but I dont know how to fix this without editing the code. I would prefer fixing it by editing the project structure as a pose to editing the code.\'a0\
{\listtext	\'95	}In the other it appears again to be a structure problem with the Stats Package.\
\pard\pardeftab720\ql\qnatural
\cf0 \
Read Semantic Properties for Lightweight Specification in Knowledgeable Development Environments\
\
Considered JSON, XML & YAML\
\'a0\'a0 \'a0Comparison -http://webignition.net/articles/xml-vs-yaml-vs-json-a-study-to-find-answers/\'a0\
\'a0\'a0 \'a0YAML is more human readable compared to JSON. XML covers more uses but is significantly more complex. As A result I am leaning towards YAML.\
\
Mapping Of Known Semantic Properties\
\'a0\'a0 \'a0Researched into starting MetaData table but im begging to feel that the annotations for Java & JML are the same and in many cases unrelated to BON.\
\
Developing YAML representation of semantic properties\
\'a0\'a0 \'a0Decided to write grammer using tables on Kind website as a basis.\
\'a0\'a0 \'a0\'a0\'a0 \'a0http://kind.ucd.ie/documents/whitepapers/code_standards/properties.html\
\
\pard\pardeftab720\ql\qnatural

\b \cf0 \
Wednesday 9 June
\b0 \
\
\
Design Grammar for Semantic Properties\
Design Decision between Grammar that is covers existing semantic properties and nothing else or a more general Grammar that accepts the full set of existing properties and other properties of a similar form.\'a0\
\
\
YAML Further Research\
\

\b \
Thursday 10 June
\b0 \
\
Design Grammar for Semantic Properties\
\'a0\'a0 \'a0Went from very specific model to more general model(too general?)\
\
Plan Development\
\'a0\'a0 \'a0Decided on mapping between grammar and YAML\'a0\
\
\

\b Friday 11 June
\b0 \

\b \
}