\input texinfo   @c -*-texinfo-*-
@c %**start of header

@setfilename jml_homework.info
@settitle JML and ESC/Java2 Homework Exercises $Revision$
@c Other commands that globally affect the document formatting: 
@c synindex, footnotestyle
@afourwide
@paragraphindent 0
@c firstparagraphindent 0
@c %**end of header
@c =============================================================================

@c =============================================================================
@c %**summary and copyright

This document contains a set of homework exercises for those that wish
to learn JML and ESC/Java2.  It was begun by Joseph R. Kiniry
<kiniry@@acm.org> in May 2004 for the tutorial ``Design by Contract
and Automatic Verification for Java with JML and ESC/Java2'' presented
at ECOOP 2004 in Oslo, Norway in June 2004.  This is edition
$Revision$.

This document is still very much a work in progress.  Suggestions and input 
are welcome.

@copying
The JML and ESC/Java2 Homework Exercises are licensed under the Creative
Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike 2.0 license.  See
http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/2.0/

Copyright @copyright{} 2004 Joseph R. Kiniry

@quotation
You are free:
@itemize
@item
to copy, distribute, display, and perform the work
@item
to make derivative works
@end itemize

Under the following conditions:
@itemize
@item
Attribution. You must give the original author credit.
@item
Noncommercial. You may not use this work for commercial purposes.
@item
Share Alike. If you alter, transform, or build upon this work, you may
distribute the resulting work only under a license identical to this
one.
@end itemize

For any reuse or distribution, you must make clear to others the license
terms of this work.

Any of these conditions can be waived if you get permission from the
author.

Your fair use and other rights are in no way affected by the above.

This is a human-readable summary of the Legal Code.

See http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/2.0/legalcode
@end quotation

@end copying

@c %**end of summary and copyright
@c =============================================================================

@c =============================================================================
@c %**title, contents, and copyright

@titlepage
@title JML and ESC/Java2 Homework Exercises
@subtitle Learning JML and ESC/Java2 Through Example
@subtitle Edition $Revision$, May 2004
@subtitle These exercises use at least JML version 5.0rc1 and ESC/Java2 version 2.0a7.
@author Joseph R. Kiniry <kiniry@@acm.org>

@c The following two commands start the copyright page.
@page
@vskip 0pt plus 1filll
@insertcopying

@c Will be published by the Nijmegen Institute for Computing and Information
@c Science at the University of Nijmegen as technical report NIII-R04XX.
@c See http://www.cs.kun.nl/research/reports/
@end titlepage

@c metadata used in HTML
@documentdescription
Homework Exercises, Java Modeling Language, JML, ESC/Java, ESC/Java2,
Extended Static Checking, Extended Static Checker, Design by Contract,
Java, Verification, jUnit, Unit Testing, Model Checking, BISL,
Behavioral Interface Specification Language, Kiniry
@end documentdescription

@c Output the table of contents at the beginning.
@contents

@c %**end of title, contents, and copyright
@c =============================================================================

@c =============================================================================
@c %**top node and master menu

@c We recommend including the copying permissions here as well as the
@c segments above.
@ifnottex
@node Top, Introduction, (dir), (dir)
@top JML and ESC/Java Homework Exercises

@insertcopying
@end ifnottex

This set of homework problems focus on the use of JML in runtime
assertion checking (with @t{jmlc} and @t{jmlrac}) and static
verification with ESC/Java2.

@menu
* Introduction::                An introduction to these homework exercises.
* Core::                        Understanding the core concepts of JML.
* Using::                       Ways to use JML and ESC/Java2.
* Copying::                     Your rights and freedoms.
* Index::                       Complete index.

@end menu

@c %**end top node and master menu
@c =============================================================================

@c =============================================================================
@c %**body

@node Introduction, Core, Top, Top
@unnumbered Introduction

@cindex Introduction

The Java Modeling Language (JML) is a behavioral interface specification
language that can be used to specify the behavior of Java modules. It
combines the ``Design by Contract'' approach of Eiffel and the
model-based specification approach of the Larch family of interface
specification languages with some elements of the refinement calculus.

The JML tool suite comes with a typechecker (@t{jml}), a compiler
(@t{jmlc}), a runtime assertion checker (@t{jmlrac}), a Javadoc-based
documentation generator (@t{jmldoc}), a set of unit test tools
(@t{jml-junit}, @t{jmlunit}, @t{jtest}), and a specification skeleton
generator and specification comparison tool (@t{jmlspec}).

The JML tool suite is primarily the development of the JML project at
Iowa State University, led by Gary Leavens.  http://www.jmlspecs.org/

Several other tools understand (often subsets of) JML:
@itemize
@item
The Extended Static Checker for Java (ESC/Java version 1).
http://research.compaq.com/SRC/esc/
@item
The Open Source Extended Static Checker for Java (ESC/Java version 2, or
ESC/Java2 for short) from the SoS Group at the University of Nijmegen
and David Cok.
http://www.cs.kun.nl/sos/research/escjava/
@item
The LOOP compiler from the SoS Group at the University of Nijmegen.
http://www.cs.kun.nl/sos/
@item
The Daikon invariant detector from the Program Analysis Group at MIT.
http://pag.lcs.mit.edu/daikon/
@item
The ChAsE frame axiom checker from Lemme project at INRIA Sophia-Antipolis.
http://www-sop.inria.fr/lemme/verificard/modifSpec/index.html
@item
The JACK tool from Gemplus.
http://www.gemplus.com/smart/r_d/trends/jack.html
@item
The Bogor tool from the SpEx project at Kansas State University.
http://spex.projects.cis.ksu.edu/
@end itemize

This set of homework problems focus on the use of JML in runtime
assertion checking (with @t{jmlc} and @t{jmlrac}) and static
verification with ESC/Java2.

@c =============================================================================
@node Core, Using, Introduction, Top
@unnumbered Core JML Constructs

@cindex Core JML Constructs

The following sections discuss all of the core constructs of JML with
examples and exercises.  It is suggested that each exercise be completed
in sequence, as the exercises build upon each other in the order
presented.  @i{I.e.}, @ref{Problem-2,,Problem two} builds on the
knowledge that you gained in @ref{Problem-1,,Problem one}.

It is assumed that the reader has a basic understanding of the
following notions: @emph{assertion}, @emph{invariant},
@emph{specification}, @emph{signature}, @emph{class}, and @emph{type}.

It is also assumed that the reader has a good understanding of Java.
If you want write a specification of a method written in Java,
@emph{you have to understand what the method does @strong{and} what it
is @strong{meant to do}}.  You cannot expect to write specifications
for programs written in a language you do not understand.

When working on these problems, do not attempt to obtain full
verification completeness at the cost of poor specifications.
Understanding the limitations of ESC/Java2 and other JML-based tools
is part of the challenge of writing specifications and performing
verfications today.

In particular, several classes or methods are reused through several
problems.  As new constructs are introduced, and as your
specifications become more rich (and thus, complete), more of your
code will verify.  You should not expect all of your answers to fully
verify until you have covered all of the concepts discussed in this
document.

@c ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
@menu
* Assertions::                  Understanding basic assertions.
* Assumptions::                 Making basic assumptions explicit.
* Ghost Variables::             
* PrePost::                     Core concepts of method specifications.
* Modifies::                    Reasoning about and with frame axioms.
* Data Groups::                 
* Heavyweight::                 Expressive and easy to understand specifications.
* Invariants::                  Core concepts of class specifications.
* Loops::                       Reasoning about loops.
* Aliasing::                    Reasoning in the face of aliasing adversity.
* Models::                      Specifying and reasoning with models.
@end menu

@c ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
@node Assertions, Assumptions, Core, Core
@unnumberedsec Assertions

@cindex Assertions

An assertion is a predicate that @emph{must always} be true.  Assertions
are typically used for debugging and (localized) documentation purposes.

In JML, an assertion statement has the form
@display
@var{assert-statement} ::= @code{assert} @var{expression} [ @code{:} @var{expression} ] @code{;}
@end display
@i{(Note that all specifications of JML grammar in this document are
highly simplified from the actual JML grammar.  Only the basic forms
of each statement or clause are shown and are sufficient for the
purpose of this homework.)}

The first expression is the predicate that must be true.  The second
(optional) expression must be of type @code{String}.  The value of this
expression is printed by some tools when the assertion fails.  (add
xrefs)

Beginning in Java 1.4, an @code{assert} keyword was introduced.  The
syntax of the Java assert statement is the same as that of JML.  (add
xref)

Java's semantics does not restrict either subexpression in its assert
statement, so you can write assert statements that have side-effects
such as
@example
        int x;
        x++;
        assert (x++ == 2) : new String("This is a bad idea.");
@end example

This is a very bad idea, as it means that the behavior of your program
changes whether you are testing your assertions or not.

JML's assert statement does not permit side effects in either
subexpression.

Using runtime checking (with @t{jmlc} and @t{jmlrac}), JML and Java
assert statements are tested at runtime.  Using ESC/Java, JML assert
statements are proven at compile-time.  

In ESC/Java2, Java assert statements are treated one of two ways.  They
are either
@itemize
@item
Treated as Java assert statements using the @code{-eajava} or
@code{-javaAssertions} (synonymous) switches, or
@item
Treated as JML assert statements using the @code{-eajml} or
@code{-jmlAssertions} (synonymous) switches.
@end itemize
In the former case, a failed assertion has the semantics of 
@example
        throw new AssertionError(second expression);
@end example

Thus, you are @strong{not} reasoning about another potential runtime
exception, as all subtypes of @code{Error} are ignored by ESC/Java. (add
xref)

@strong{Problem 1.} @anchor{Problem-1} Annotate the following code
with Java assertions as indicated.  The expression @code{P(a0,a1,...)}
means ``replace this expression with a predicate that is true of the
variables @code{a0} and @code{a1} and ...''.  Write the strongest
predicate possible, given the context of the assertion.  Execute the
class to check your answers.

The provided @t{Makefile} in the @t{problems} directory can be used to
compile, run, and verify all problems.

@example
@include problems/JavaAssertions.java.texinfo
@end example

@strong{Problem 2.} @anchor{Problem-2} Annotate the following code
with JML assertions as indicated.  Write the strongest predicate
possible, given the context of the assertion.  After you have written
the assertions, first execute the class using @code{jmlrac} to check
your answers, then attempt to verify your answers using
@code{escjava2}.

@example
@include problems/JmlAssertions.java.texinfo
@end example

@c ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
@node Assumptions, Ghost Variables, Assertions, Core
@unnumberedsec Assumptions

@cindex Assumptions

You will notice that nearly all of the assertions that you wrote for
Problems @ref{Problem-1,,one} and @ref{Problem-2,,two} cannot be
checked with ESC/Java2 as the @code{JavaAnnotations} and
@code{JmlAnnotations} classes are currently written.  While @emph{you}
might know that each assertion is true, given the context of the
program and the body of the @code{main()} method, there is no
information that ESC/Java2 can use to reach this same conclusion.

Because ESC/Java2 performs verification in a @emph{modular} fashion,
the @emph{assumptions} you based your assertions upon in each method,
which in turn were based upon what you read in the @code{main()}
method's body, are unknown to ESC/Java2.

More precisely, to reason about the correctness of the method
@code{n(int, Object, String)}, ESC/Java2 only uses the signature and
body of @code{n()} and everything they depends upon.  This set of
dependencies is large.  It including all the types mentioned in
@code{n()}, the signature and specification of any methods @code{n()}
might be overriding, and all invariants of the class
@code{JmlAssertions} that relate to fields mentioned in @code{n()}.
(More details about method specifications and class invariants will be
covered shortly.)

Notice that, to reason about @code{n()}, @emph{nothing} needs to be
known about the body of the @code{main()} method of
@code{JmlAssertions}.  Thus, all of the assumptions you made by
reading the body of @code{main()} are unknown to ESC/Java2.

The next two problems will focus on making assumptions explicit.  The
JML keyword @code{assume} is used to specify assumptions precisely.
@code{assume} is used very much like @code{assert}, except instead of
stating what @emph{must} be true at a certain point in a program (as
one does with an @code{assert}), an @code{assume} statement says what
@emph{is} true at a certain point in a program.

In JML, an assume statement has the form
@display
@var{assume-statement} ::= @var{assume-keyword} @var{predicate} [ @code{:} @var{expression} ] @code{;}
@end display
The assume statement thus has the exact same structure of the assert
statement, but means exactly the opposite.

@strong{Problem 3.} @anchor{Problem-3} Annotate your code from
@ref{Problem-2,,Problem two} with JML assumptions.  Try to write down
the @emph{minimal} set of assumptions that ensure all of your
assertions verify correctly with ESC/Java2.

For the following discussion we will refer to the answer key found in
the class @code{JmlAssertionsAndAssumptionsKey}, duplicated here for
reference.

@example
@include problems/JmlAssertionsAndAssumptionsKey.java.texinfo
@end example

Note that the assumptions in this class are not the only ones that are
correct.

Stronger assumptions (that is, logically stronger predicates) that
imply these weaker assumptions are correct also, though are not as
weak as possible.

For example, if one were to write
@example
  //@@ assume p != null && t != null;
@end example
to provide an assumption to fulfill the assertion
@example
  //@@ assert p != null;
@end example
the assertion would verify.  But the assumption is stronger than
necessary, since the information about the variable @code{t} is
superfluous.  The assumption can be made @emph{weaker} by simply
removing the term @code{t != null} because @t{A && B ==> A}.  I.e.,
@example
  //@@ assert p != null && t != null ==> p != null;
@end example
is always a true assertion, regardless of the values of @code{p} and
@code{t}.

The locations of the assumptions can also vary to some degree.  Many
cannot, in particular, those having to do with assertions located at
the very beginning of method bodies cannot be moved any ``earlier''
because there is no earlier statement.  Moving the assumption
@emph{outside} of the method body, for example into the @code{main()}
method, has no effect due to the nature of modular verification, as
discussed earlier.  (add xref)

On the other hand, assumptions in the middle of a method can often be
moved around with some latitude.  For example,  the statement
@example
  //@@ assume i == 257;
@end example
in the method @code{o(int, Object, String)} could be moved earlier in
the method.  In fact, because the variable @code{i} is not referenced
anywhere earlier in the method, the assumption could (in theory) be
moved all of the way to the beginning of the method.

One problem with ESC/Java2 highlighted by this exercise is its
incomplete support for arithmetic, and bitwise operations in
particular.  You will find that nearly all assertions having to do
with the results of bitwise operations cannot be verified.

Consider the following method:
@example
  static void nn(Object p, Object t) @{
    int i = 1, j = 1;
    i = i | 0x100;
    //@@ assert i == 257;
    //@@ assert 0 <= i && i <= 1000;
    //@@ assert i == (1 | 0x100);
  @}
@end example
While all three assertions are true, only the third one (the most
complicated one, in some respects!) can be verified by ESC/Java2.
This weakness is due to the fact that the theorem prover used by
ESC/Java2 (called ``Simplify'') does not deal with bitwise operations
(see Bug #965748 at SourceForge for more information).  Thus, one
cannot reason about any variables involved in bitwise operations at
this time.

Assume statements are not to be used lightly.  In fact, as a general
rule, one should use assumes only as an absolute last resort.  It is
entirely too easy to introduce subtle inconsistencies to
specifications with assume statements.  If such an inconsistency
exists, then the related methods will verify immediately because they
have a false premise.

E.g., this method verifies:
@example
  void m() @{
    //@@ assume i == 0 && i == 1;
    //@@ assert true == false;
  @}
@end example

@c ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
@node Ghost Variables, PrePost, Assumptions, Core
@unnumberedsec Ghost Variables

@cindex Ghost Variables

@c TODO

@c ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
@node PrePost, Modifies, Ghost Variables, Core
@unnumberedsec Lightweight Contracts

@cindex Lightweight Contracts

A @emph{specification} of the class and its methods describes the
manner in which the class is correctly used.  To write such a
specification, one uses two primary concepts: @emph{method contracts}
and @emph{class invariants}.  The problems of this section will focus
on the former; invariants will be dealt with later. (add xref).

A @emph{method contract} consists of two basic assertions: a
@emph{precondition} which states under which circumstances the method
is guaranteed to behave correctly, and a @emph{postcondition} which
states what is true when the method completes executing.

@unnumberedsubsec Preconditions
@cindex Preconditions

The assume statements written for the preceding problems that were
``pushed'' to the beginning of the method are preconditions; they
state some of the conditions necessary for their method to terminate
properly.

Preconditions are specified in JML using the @code{requires} clause
which has the following form:
@display
@var{requires-clause} ::= @code{requires} @var{pred-or-not} @code{;}
@var{pred-or-not} ::= @var{predicate} | @code{\not_specified}
@end display

The value @code{\not_specified} says that you have a precondition in
mind but you simply are not specifying it.  Different tools can view
such an unspecified precondition in different ways.  For example,
ESC/Java2 assumes a default precondition of @code{true}.

The process of writing preconditions is a tricky business.
Preconditions must be ensured by the @emph{caller} of the method,
therefore everything stated in the precondition must be checkable by
the caller, prior to making the call.  Thus, one can only
(legitimately) express assertions in precoditions that are ``at least
as visible'' as the method they are guarding.

@strong{Problem 4.} @anchor{Problem-4} Annotate the following code
with @emph{preconditions} only.  Consider what are the
@emph{necessary} conditions for the method bodies to (a) not fail
abnormally (e.g., throw @code{NullPointerExceptions},
@code{IndexOutOfBoundsExceptions}, etc.), (b) pass all assertions
in the code, and (c) perform their job correctly (e.g., not compute an
incorrect value, given your intuition of the purpose of the method).
Check the use of all of your method calls with ESC/Java2.

@example
@include problems/PrePostConditions.java.texinfo
@end example

Notice that many preconditions focus on variables other than the
formal parameters of their method (as in the method @code{o(int)}).
Some depend upon class attributes (as in the methods @code{m()} and
@code{n()}), while others focus on ``global'' values like static
fields of the enclosing class (as in the method @code{p(String)}) or
static field of other classes (as in the method @code{q()}).

It is frequently argued that the more a method's precondition depends
upon variables other than @code{this} and its fields, @code{this}'s
class and its ancestors and their fields, and the method itself's
parameters, the more poorly designed the method is due to the
complexity of its interdependencies and its consequent fragility in
the face of ``external'' changes.

In this example in particular, the method @code{q()} is poorly
designed due to its dependence on the (static) fields of the seeminly
unrelated class @code{StaticPreconditions}.

Additionally, the more complex a precondition is, the harder it
sometimes is to ensure it is fulfilled.  This means that potentially
more state has to be exposed as part of the design of related classes,
as the client is responsible for ensuring the precondition of a method
is fulfilled before calling the method.  Consequently, complex
preconditions place more burdon on the client programmer than simple
preconditions do.

This balancing act, between the complexity of preconditions and
robustness of API methods in the face of bogus input, is supremely
evident in the design of core reusable APIs in the Java platform.
This topic will be discussed in more detail later in this document.
@c add xref

@unnumberedsubsec Postconditions
@cindex Postconditions

@emph{Postconditions} are used to describe how a method should/must
behave.  If a method's preconditions are fulfilled, then the (normal)
postconditions @emph{must} be true if the method terminates
normally---that is, does not throw an exception or never terminates,
perhaps by going into an infinite loop.

Normal postconditions are specified in JML using the @code{ensures}
clause:
@display
@var{ensures-clause} ::= @code{ensures} @var{pred-or-not} @code{;}
@end display

Once again, an unspecified postcondition means ``I have something in
mind but I'm not writing it down.''  The default postcondition for
ESC/Java2 is @code{true}.

In a postcondition predicate one can reference any visible fields, the
parameters of the method, the special keyword @code{\result} if the
method has a non-@code{void} return type, and may contain expressions
of the form @code{\old(@var{E})}.  @code{\result} is used to reference
the value of the result of the method.  The @code{\old()} expression
is used to references values in the pre-state of the method; that is,
you can refer to the state of any values just @emph{before} the method
began executing.

@strong{Problem 5.} @anchor{Problem-5} Annotate the code of the
previous problem with @emph{postconditions} that match your
preconditions.  Consider what is known to be true when each method
terminates @emph{normally}.  Check your postconditions with ESC/Java2.

@unnumberedsubsec Exceptional (Abnormal) Postconditions
@cindex Exceptional Postconditions
@cindex Abnormal Postconditions

Frequently Java APIs use exceptions and errors (all descendents of the
class @code{Throwable}) to indicate errors or perform flow-control.
Erroneous termination of a method is due to unexpected circumstances;
changes in program flow are non-erroneous termination of a method due
to expected, but not ``normal'' behavior in response to some
particular expected circumstances.  This ``design confusion'' of
exceptions in Java is a primary criticism of the language.

Both situations are deemed @emph{exceptional termination} in the JML
vernacular because both use Java exceptions to signal termination of a
method.  To state what is known about the system when an exception is
thrown, an @emph{exceptional postcondition} is used.

Exceptional postconditions are written in JML using the @code{signals}
clause:
@display
@var{signals-clause} ::= @code{signals} @code{(} @var{reference-type} [ @var{ident} ] @code{)} [ @var{pred-or-not} ] @code{;}
@end display

In many circumstances the value(s) of the exception object simply do
not matter.  In those circumstances the simpler form of the
exceptional postcondition can be used:
@example
  //@@ signals (java.io.IOException) aPredicate();
@end example

If one wants to refer to the exception object being thrown in the
exceptional postcondition, a bound identifier can be included in the
signals clause.  E.g.,
@example
  //@@ signals (java.io.IOException ioe) ioe.getMessage().equals("I/O Error!");
@end example
which is equivalent to the signals clause
@example
  //@@ signals (java.lang.Exception e) (e instanceof IOException) ==>
  //@@                                 ioe.getMessage().equals("I/O Error!");
@end example

The default exceptional postcondition for ESC/Java2 is currently
@example
  //@@ signals (java.lang.Exception) true;
@end example

Note that a @code{signals} clause specifies when a certain exception
@emph{may} be thrown, not when a certain exception @emph{must} be
thrown.  To say that an exception must be thrown in some situation,
one has to exclude that situation from other signals clauses and from
all ensures clauses.

Also note that Java @emph{errors} are @emph{very} rarely specified and
are not reasoned about at all using ESC/Java2.  Also, Java ``runtime
exceptions'' (descendents of the class
@code{java.lang.RuntimeException}) are also rarely specified using
exceptional postconditions.

@strong{Problem 6.} @anchor{Problem-6} Annotate the code of the
previous problem with @emph{exceptional postconditions}.  Consider
what is known to be true when each method terminates
@emph{abnormally}.  If a method @emph{cannot} terminate abnormally,
annotate such using an exceptional postcondition with a @code{false}
predicate.  Check your exceptional postconditions with ESC/Java2.

@c comments on Key, particularly the method calls of main

@c ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
@node  Modifies, Data Groups, PrePost, Core
@unnumberedsec Frame Axioms

@cindex Frame Axioms

Frame axioms are used to denote which fields @emph{may} (@emph{not
must}) be modified by a method.  Frame axioms are specified in JML
using the @emph{assignable} clause:
@display
@var{assignable-clause} ::= @code{assignable} @var{store-ref} [ @code{,} @var{store-ref} ] @dots{} @code{;}
@end display

Special keywords @code{\everything} and @code{\nothing} are used to
state that a method may modify @emph{any} visible field (in the former
case), or may modify @emph{no} visible field (in the case of the
latter).  To specify that all visible field of an object @var{o} may
be modified a globbing-like syntax is used, e.g., @code{assignable
o.*}.

The default assignable clause for ESC/Java2 is
@example
  //@@ assignable \everything;
@end example

Specifying the frame axioms of your methods is @emph{vital} to correct
reasoning with ESC/Java2.  If your frame axioms are incorrect,
verification is unsound.  Consider the following example.

@example
@include problems/BogusFrameConditions.java.texinfo
@end example

ESC/Java2 produces the following output:
@example
BogusFrameConditions: l() ...
    [TIME]  passed

BogusFrameConditions: m() ...
    [TIME]  passed

BogusFrameConditions: n() ...
------------------------------------------------------------------------
BogusFrameConditions.java:20: Warning: Possible assertion failure (Assert)
    //@ assert true == false;
        ^
------------------------------------------------------------------------
    [TIME]  failed

BogusFrameConditions: o() ...
------------------------------------------------------------------------
BogusFrameConditions.java:26: Warning: Possible assertion failure (Assert)
    //@ assert true == false;
        ^
------------------------------------------------------------------------
    [TIME]  failed
@end example

Notice that the methods @code{l()} and @code{m()} @emph{pass}, proving
the bogus assertion @code{true == false}.  The reason these methods
pass is because the verification of methods whose frame axiom is
@code{assignable \everything;} is incomplete.

The old SRC ESC/Java version 1 did not check frame conditions.  This
led to very specification bugs that exhibited themselves in the subtle
behavior of ESC/Java verifying a (sometimes very complex) method very
quickly.

ESC/Java2 now checks frame conditions, but its checking algorithm is
not complete.  Thus, as a general rule, one should avoid the use of
@code{\everything} in frame axioms as much as possible at this point
in time.

@c checking frame axioms
@c

@strong{Problem 7.} @anchor{Problem-7} Annotate the code of the
previous problem with @emph{frame axioms}.  Make your assignable
clauses as precise as possible, given the body of the methods.  Make
sure to write a frame axiom for your @code{s()} method, but do not
bother with the @code{main(String[])} method.  Check your frame axioms
with ESC/Java2.

Note that now that frame axioms are specified for all of your methods
more specifications are verified by ESC/Java2.

@c comments on Key, particularly the method calls of main

@c ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
@node Data Groups, Heavyweight, Modifies, Core
@unnumberedsec Data Groups

@cindex Data Groups

The concept of a @emph{data group} is a useful one, particularly with
respect to specifying the frame axioms of a method and structuring
one's specification, from both from a design and a verification point
of view.

A data group can be thought of as as collection of fields that all
relate to each other in some way: perhaps they are the key data values
of a class, or set of classes; or perhaps they are all interdependent
due to the design of your architecture.

One uses the @code{in} keyword to specify that a particular field is
@emph{in} (a part of) a specific data group.  A field can be in many
data groups, but data groups cannot be nested.  Thus, all of the data
groups of a system define a collection of (possibly overlapping)
subsets of all fields.

Data groups are defined explicitly and implicitly, using the
@code{JMLDataGroup} class in the former case, and using @emph{implicit
data groups} in the latter.  @code{JMLDataGroup} is the JML class used
to define a new data group, in lieu of a @code{datagroup} keyword at
this point in time.

Every field implicitely defines a data group of the same name.  For
example, the Java field declarations
@example
class C @{
  byte b;
  int i;
  Object o;
  ...
@}
@end example
is equivalent to the following
@example
class C @{
  //@ JMLDataGroup b;
  byte b; //@ in b;
  //@ JMLDataGroup i;
  int i; //@ in i;
  //@ JMLDataGroup o;
  Object o; //@ in o;
  ...
@}
@end example

The data group most frequently used in JML specifications is an
explicitely predefined data group found in the specification for the
base class @code{java.lang.Object}.  It is called the
@code{objectState} data group.  The @code{objectState} data group
@cindex objectState
is used as a general data group that represents all non-private,
transient state of an object.  The @code{objectState} data group is
only an convenience construct; it has no special significance to and
of the JML tools.

A data group can be used within a frame axiom.  For a data group
@code{d}, writing @code{assignable d} means that all fields which
are part of the data group @code{d} might be modified.

@strong{Problem 8.} @anchor{Problem-8} Annotate the code of the
previous problem with @emph{data groups}.  Make your assignable
clauses as broad as possible considering possible future extensions of
the class you are specifying.  Check your frame axioms with ESC/Java2.

@c ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
@node Heavyweight, Invariants, Data Groups, Core
@unnumberedsec Heavyweight Specifications

@cindex Heavyweight Specifications

@c ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
@node Invariants, Loops, Heavyweight, Core
@unnumberedsec Invariants

@cindex Invariants

@c ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
@node Loops, Aliasing, Invariants, Core
@unnumberedsec Reasoning about Loops

@cindex Reasoning about Loops

@c ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
@node Aliasing, Models, Loops, Core
@unnumberedsec Aliasing

@cindex Aliasing

@c ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
@node Models,  , Aliasing, Core
@unnumberedsec Models

@cindex Models

@c =============================================================================
@node Using, Copying, Core, Top
@unnumbered Using JML and ESC/Java2

@cindex Using JML and ESC/Java2

@c ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
@menu
* Abstract Classes and Interfaces::  Specifying abstract classes and interfaces.  
* Annotating Code::             Annotating preexisting code.
* Annotating APIs::             Annotating APIs.
* Designing by Contract::       Design by Contract with JML for Java.
@end menu

@c ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
@node Abstract Classes and Interfaces, Annotating Code, Using, Using
@unnumberedsec Specifying Abstract Classes and Interfaces

@cindex Specifying Abstract Classes and Interfaces
@cindex Abstract Classes, Specifying
@cindex Interfaces, Specifying

@c ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
@node Annotating Code, Annotating APIs, Abstract Classes and Interfaces, Using
@unnumberedsec Annotating Preexisting Java Code

@cindex Annotating Existing Java Code
@cindex Code Annotation

@c ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
@node Annotating APIs, Designing by Contract, Annotating Code, Using
@unnumberedsec Annotating Preexisting APIs

@cindex Annotating Existing APIs
@cindex API Annotation

@c ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
@node Designing by Contract,  , Annotating APIs, Using
@unnumberedsec Designing by Contract

@cindex Designing by Contract
@cindex Design by Contract

@c =============================================================================
@node Copying, Index, Using, Top
@unnumbered Copying

@cindex Copying

@insertcopying

@c %**end of body
@c =============================================================================

@c =============================================================================
@c %**end of document

@node Index,  , Copying, Top
@unnumbered Index

@printindex cp

@bye
